WindowsBuilds/winutf8/ucrt3/toolchain_libs/mxe/README.md, before:

This is a "fork" of https://github.com/mxe/mxe (with website at
https://mxe.cc/). This fork adds several MXE packages, patches some existing
MXE packages and updates other, as needed by R CRAN packages and Rtools.

There is only a very trivial change to MXE "itself" (MXE_ROOT instead of
ROOT) and all the changes should be mergeable and be merged upstream after
some necessary cleanups and more testing.  Some of the changes may be
specific to UCRT, static compilation and 64-bit builds.  Also, this "fork"
has a custom settings.mk for Rtools with a pre-defined subset of MXE
packages to build.

Non-R MXE users may use this as an inspiration when fixing issues in
selected MXE packages.

New users of MXE from the R community are invited to read 

for R-devel: https://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/base/howto-R-devel.html
for R 4.2: https://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/base/howto-R-4.2.html

to get started and to learn how this connects to Rtools. The rest of this is
original MXE documentation.

# MXE (M cross environment)

[![License][license-badge]][license-page]

[license-page]: LICENSE.md
[license-badge]: https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-brightgreen.svg

[![Async Chat (Trial))](https://img.shields.io/badge/zulip-join_chat-brightgreen.svg)](https://mxe.zulipchat.com/)

MXE (M cross environment) is a GNU Makefile that compiles a cross
compiler and cross compiles many free libraries such as SDL and
Qt. Thus, it provides a nice cross compiling environment for
various target platforms, which:

  * is designed to run on any Unix system
  * is easy to adapt and to extend
  * builds many free libraries in addition to the cross compiler
  * can also build just a subset of the packages, and automatically builds their dependencies
  * downloads all needed packages and verifies them by their checksums
  * is able to update the version numbers of all packages automatically
  * directly uses source packages, thus ensuring the whole build mechanism is transparent
  * allows inter-package and intra-package parallel builds whenever possible
  * bundles [ccache](https://ccache.samba.org) to speed up repeated builds
  * integrates well with autotools, cmake, qmake, and hand-written makefiles.
  * has been in continuous development since 2007 and is used by several projects

## Supported Toolchains

  * Runtime: MinGW-w64
  * Host Triplets:
    - `i686-w64-mingw32`
    - `x86_64-w64-mingw32`
  * Packages:
    - static
    - shared
  * GCC Threading Libraries (`winpthreads` is always available):
    - [posix](https://github.com/mxe/mxe/pull/958) [(default)](https://github.com/mxe/mxe/issues/2258)
    - win32 (supported by limited amount packages)
  * GCC Exception Handling:
    - Default
      - i686: sjlj
      - x86_64: seh
    - [Alternatives (experimental)](https://github.com/mxe/mxe/pull/1664)
      - i686: dw2
      - x86_64: sjlj

Please see [mxe.cc](https://mxe.cc/) for further information and package support matrix.

## Shared Library Notes
There are several approaches to recursively finding DLL dependencies (alphabetical list):
  * [go script](https://github.com/desertbit/gml/blob/master/cmd/gml-copy-dlls/main.go)
  * [pe-util](https://github.com/gsauthof/pe-util) packaged with [mxe](https://github.com/mxe/mxe/blob/master/src/pe-util.mk)
  * [python script](https://github.com/mxe/mxe/blob/master/tools/copydlldeps.py)
  * [shell script](https://github.com/mxe/mxe/blob/master/tools/copydlldeps.md)

Commit message:

Additional warning that this is a fork of MXE (not the original).
git-svn-id: https://svn.r-project.org/R-dev-web/trunk@5164 c52295ea-58df-0310-926a-d16021944841

WindowsBuilds/winutf8/ucrt3/toolchain_libs/mxe/README.md, after:

This is a "fork" of https://github.com/mxe/mxe (with website at
https://mxe.cc/). This fork adds several MXE packages, patches some existing
MXE packages and updates other, as needed by R CRAN packages and Rtools.

There is only a very trivial change to MXE "itself" (MXE_ROOT instead of
ROOT) and all the changes should be mergeable and be merged upstream after
some necessary cleanups and more testing.  Some of the changes may be
specific to UCRT, static compilation and 64-bit builds.  Also, this "fork"
has a custom settings.mk for Rtools with a pre-defined subset of MXE
packages to build.

Non-R MXE users may use this as an inspiration when fixing issues in
selected MXE packages.

New users of MXE from the R community are invited to read 

for R-devel: https://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/base/howto-R-devel.html
for R 4.2: https://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/base/howto-R-4.2.html

to get started and to learn how this connects to Rtools. The rest of this is
original MXE documentation.

As this is not the official MXE, it cannot be used with the APT repository
of pre-build cross-compilers and libraries (they would be of different
versions and at the time of writing not UCRT). 

# MXE (M cross environment)

[![License][license-badge]][license-page]

[license-page]: LICENSE.md
[license-badge]: https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-brightgreen.svg

[![Async Chat (Trial))](https://img.shields.io/badge/zulip-join_chat-brightgreen.svg)](https://mxe.zulipchat.com/)

MXE (M cross environment) is a GNU Makefile that compiles a cross
compiler and cross compiles many free libraries such as SDL and
Qt. Thus, it provides a nice cross compiling environment for
various target platforms, which:

  * is designed to run on any Unix system
  * is easy to adapt and to extend
  * builds many free libraries in addition to the cross compiler
  * can also build just a subset of the packages, and automatically builds their dependencies
  * downloads all needed packages and verifies them by their checksums
  * is able to update the version numbers of all packages automatically
  * directly uses source packages, thus ensuring the whole build mechanism is transparent
  * allows inter-package and intra-package parallel builds whenever possible
  * bundles [ccache](https://ccache.samba.org) to speed up repeated builds
  * integrates well with autotools, cmake, qmake, and hand-written makefiles.
  * has been in continuous development since 2007 and is used by several projects

## Supported Toolchains

  * Runtime: MinGW-w64
  * Host Triplets:
    - `i686-w64-mingw32`
    - `x86_64-w64-mingw32`
  * Packages:
    - static
    - shared
  * GCC Threading Libraries (`winpthreads` is always available):
    - [posix](https://github.com/mxe/mxe/pull/958) [(default)](https://github.com/mxe/mxe/issues/2258)
    - win32 (supported by limited amount packages)
  * GCC Exception Handling:
    - Default
      - i686: sjlj
      - x86_64: seh
    - [Alternatives (experimental)](https://github.com/mxe/mxe/pull/1664)
      - i686: dw2
      - x86_64: sjlj

Please see [mxe.cc](https://mxe.cc/) for further information and package support matrix.

## Shared Library Notes
There are several approaches to recursively finding DLL dependencies (alphabetical list):
  * [go script](https://github.com/desertbit/gml/blob/master/cmd/gml-copy-dlls/main.go)
  * [pe-util](https://github.com/gsauthof/pe-util) packaged with [mxe](https://github.com/mxe/mxe/blob/master/src/pe-util.mk)
  * [python script](https://github.com/mxe/mxe/blob/master/tools/copydlldeps.py)
  * [shell script](https://github.com/mxe/mxe/blob/master/tools/copydlldeps.md)
