\input texinfo
@c %**start of header
@setfilename external_libs.info
@settitle External Libraries for CRAN packages
@documentlanguage en

@include macros.texi

@titlepage
@title External Libraries for CRAN packages
@author CRAN Repository Maintainers
@end titlepage

CRAN packages may wish to link to external libraries (or rarely, invoke
other software) that needs to be installed on the CRAN check machines
(which the CRAN policy prefers to including in the package).  Requests
to add software should be sent to @code{CRAN@@R-project.org} and where
relevant copied to those responsible for the binary packages (see the
CRAN policy).

Java @abbr{SDK}s (currently @I{OpenJDK} of various versions)
are installed on all the CRAN platforms, as are @command{JAGS} and
@command{ghostscript}.  Most but not all systems have @abbr{MPI} support
installed.  All have a Cargo/@I{Rustc} installation (not necessarily very
recent).  Support for other languages such as Julia cannot be assumed.

Email addresses for those named are of the form
@samp{@var{First.Lastname}@@R-project.org}.


@c @node Linux, macOS
@unnumbered Linux

CRAN checks are done on several Debian (including incoming checks) and
Fedora machines.  Software will only be installed on the Debian machines
that is available from Debian repositories for `testing'.
The @code{rcheckserver} meta-package available from the @I{AASC} repository
at @uref{https://statmath.wu.ac.at/AASC/debian} provides all system
dependencies used for the Debian checks.

For Fedora, requests to add @abbr{RPM}s from official repositories are
preferred, but at our discretion software may be installed from
elsewhere (as has been done for @command{pandoc}) or compiled from
source (as may be needed for the fedora-clang checks).  No information
is publicly available on what @abbr{RPM}s are already installed as it differs
by machine.

Be aware that adding software to the Linux machines needs the time of
busy sysadmins, not just the CRAN team.

@c @node macOS, Windows, Linux
@unnumbered @I{macOS}

External libraries are made for both @I{macOS} architectures @emph{via}
@I{Simon Urbanek}'s `recipes' system at
@uref{https://github.com/R-macos/recipes}.  Tested updates to these
recipes or new recipes should be requested at GitHub or emailed to him,
failing which he can be asked to help to prepare a recipe.

An idea of what external libraries are currently available can be found
at
@uref{https://mac.r-project.org/bin/darwin20/x86_64/}
and
@uref{https://mac.r-project.org/bin/darwin20/arm64/}
with installation instructions at
@uref{https://mac.r-project.org/bin/}.

Requests to add or update other software (which in the past have
included @command{cmake} and @command{pandoc}) should be sent to the
maintainer, @I{Simon Urbanek}, with as much detail as possible.

There is no @abbr{MPI} support.  Although @I{OpenMPI} can be installed, only dynamic
linking works and so cannot be used portably.

JAGS is likely to be available.  There is an `official' release for both
architectures at
@uref{https://sourceforge.net/projects/mcmc-jags/files/JAGS/4.x/}.

@c @node Windows,  , macOS
@unnumbered Windows

The build system for Windows changed with 4.2.0 and only that
is considered here (and only 64-bit Windows is now supported).

Building of external libraries is done using @I{MXE}
(@uref{https://mxe.cc/}).  That has an extensive set of packages
(@uref{https://github.com/mxe/mxe/blob/master/src}), and users can
contribute others (@uref{https://mxe.cc/#creating-packages}).  For
external libraries not already available, the best approach is to
contribute to the @I{MXE} library. For advice, consult @I{Tomas Kalibera}.

Common build tools are installed using @I{Msys2} (@uref{https://www.msys2.org/}).

@I{GDAL} executables are currently available via a
@c From https://svn.r-project.org/R-dev-web/trunk/WindowsBuilds/winutf8/ucrt3/r_packages/setup_checks.ps1
@I{QGIS} installation
(@uref{https://qgis.org/downloads/QGIS-OSGeo4W-3.22.0-4.msi}), but this
may change in future.

Requests to add or update other software should be sent to the
maintainer, @I{Uwe Ligges}, with as much detail as possible.

@bye
