\input texinfo
@documentencoding UTF-8

@c %**start of header
@setfilename new_submission_checklist.info
@settitle Checklist for new CRAN submissions
@documentlanguage en

@titlepage
@title Checklist for new CRAN submissions
@author CRAN Repository Maintainers
@end titlepage

Please always read the
@uref{https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/policies.html,CRAN
policies} first. This document gives some @emph{additional} hints for a
useful CRAN submission.

Unless there are good reasons, packages submitted to CRAN are expected
to pass @code{R CMD check --as-cran}, and you will be asked to fix and
resubmit your package if it gives warnings or significant notes. To
avoid this, you should run @code{R CMD check --as-cran} yourself with a
current development version of R before submitting to CRAN.

You can use the following web services to supplement your own tests:

@itemize
@item
@uref{https://win-builder.r-project.org/,Winbuilder} checks packages on
32-bit and 64-bit Windows using a current development version of R. The
same infrastructure is used by the CRAN team for checking submitted
packages.

@item
@uref{https://github.com/r-hub/rhub,R-hub} can be used to check packages
on multiple platforms and versions of R using virtual machines. The
service is not maintained by CRAN and hence different check settings may
be in place.

@end itemize

In addition to the automated checks, we expect package authors to follow
good practices that make their package more accessible and useful to the
wider R community.

The most important way to do this is to write an informative entry in
the @code{Description} field in the @code{DESCRIPTION} file (see the
relevant section of the
@uref{https://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/r-devel/R-exts.html#The-DESCRIPTION-file,Writing
R Extensions} manual). The @code{Title} and @code{Description} fields
are shown at the top of the CRAN landing page for the package, and
should therefore be written with care.

@itemize
@item
Make the Description as informative as possible for potential new users
of your package. If in doubt, make the Description longer rather than
shorter.

@item
Put non-Enlish usage, including names of other packages and external
software, in single quotes. Example: @code{'OpenSSL'}.

@end itemize

@itemize
@item
Relevant citations should be included in the description. These should
be in author-year style, preferably followed by an identifier such as
DOI, arXiv id, or ISBN for published materials.

@item
DOIs should be enclosed in angle brackets, and formatted as
@code{<doi:10.prefix/suffix>}. Example:
@code{Sugihara (1994) <doi:10.1098/rsta.1994.0106>}.

@end itemize

@itemize
@item
arXiv identifiers should be enclosed in angle brackets, and formatted as
@code{<arXiv:YYMM.NNNNN>}. Example:
@code{Srivastava et al. (2011) <arXiv:1103.3817>}.
@end itemize

@itemize
@item
Similarly, relevant URL should be included in the description, also
enclosed in angle brackets (see the
@uref{https://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/r-devel/R-exts.html#Specifying-URLs,Writing
R Extensions} manual for details). Example:
@code{<https://cran.r-project.org/>}.
@end itemize

@bye
